# Final Project - 2020 Election Predictions
## CS109a: Intro to Data Sciences
Project members: Estelle Yao, Ivan Shu, Saul Holding and Noah Ramos

## Broad Impact Statement
Our research questions are as follows: Does accounting for various demographic, legal, and behavioral variables allow a model to predict the 2020 presidential and federal House of Representative election with higher accuracy than models did the 2016 election? What factors are most valuable in predicting election results?  
A model with a high level of predictive power may potentially have far-reaching implications across the United States. Each governing party will favor the success of different industries, meaning that knowing who will be elected next may improve market stability and reduce economic uncertainty for investors. Furthermore, such predictions can significantly improve political strategy and decision-making, especially regarding allocation of funds; any party that has access to such a model will have an advantage over their peers who do not. Individual civilians with access to predictions may also use them to decide whether they should buy or sell assets, or even migrate, before a potential unfavorable change in government or policy. Lastly, such models may help illuminate to a political party why they lost the election and smoothen the transition of power.  
Unfortunately, powerful forecasting of the future can be exploited. Governments who are aware of an incoming loss may rush out more radical policies in preparation for being ousted from office, or even attempt to change the constitution to bend the election in their favor. Beyond this, political strategy may grow increasingly predatory as an organization learns more about voters, with political groups potentially attempting to suppress specific groups’ abilities to vote.
It is also important in general to carry out machine learning research carefully to ensure as accurate results as possible. For example, it is essential to ensure that the demographic data being trained on is complete; a model that only accounts for certain racial classes would likely result in unfair predictions. It is also critical to ensure that a model does not capture spontaneous features which may drive predictions in an incorrect direction. For example, during the 2020 election year, not only did COVID-19 permeate throughout the United States, but there were also many incidences of police brutality and a resulting distrust of the government. These spontaneous factors were not included in our model and could have caused it to give poor predictions, especially on the swing states.  
Overall, our model did a good job despite uncertainties of uncovering some important features for one of the most important political events in the United States. As critical thinkers, we may be able to learn from it, and think about future elections from the perspectives of demographics, economics, financials, voting resources, and behaviors.